Placental Cell Conditioned Media Modifies Hematopoetic Stem Cell Transcriptome

Background: Factors secreted from the placenta into maternal and fetal circulation, including hormones, proteins and microvesicles are, may be important for maternal and fetal development during pregnancy. Hematopoetic stem cells (HSCs) are immature stem cells that can differentiate into all blood cell types and thereby ensure an adequate blood supply. During pregnancy, HSCs play an important role in both maternal and fetal health with mMaternal  hematopoietic stem cells HSCs maintaining maternal blood supply., The placenta is an early site of fetal hematopoiesis, while and placental hematopoietic stem cellsHSCs are involved in the early stages of fetal blood cell differentiation. As, the placenta is an early site of hematopoiesis, Ccross-talk between placental cells and hematopoietic stem cellsHSCs represents an important but understudied phenomenon of pregnancy. The impact of toxicant exposure on placental-immune cell communication is poorly understood. The goals of this study were to 1) determine if factors secreted from placental cells alter transcriptomic responses in hematopoietic stem cellsHSCs in vitro and 2) if monoethylhexyl phthalate (MEHPmonoethylhexyl phthalate (MEHP), the major metabolite of the pollutant diethylhexyl phthalate, modifies these effects. 

Methods: Using in vitro cell line models of hematopoietic stem cells (K-562) and placental syncytiotrophoblasts (differentiated BeWo), we treated K-562 cells for 24 hours with media conditioned by incubation with BeWo cells, media conditioned with BeWo cells treated with 10 µM MEHP, or unconditioned controls (n = 4 replicates for each group). We extracted K-562 cell RNA and performed RNA sequencing. We then conducted differential gene expression and pathway analysis by treatment group and accounted for multiple comparisons using false discovery rate (FDR). 

Results: Relative to vehicle control, K-562 cells treated with BeWo cell conditioned media differentially expressed 173 genes (FDR<0.05 and fold-change>2.0), relative to vehicle control. For exampleCells with treatmented with BeWo media upregulated, TPM4 was 2.4 fold upregulated (FDR=1.8x10-53) and S1PR3 was 3.3 fold upregulated (FDR=1.6x10-40) compared to controls. Upregulated genes were enriched (p<X?) for biologicalGene Ontology processes including stem cell maintenance (“somatic stem cell population maintenance”), cell proliferation (“positive regulation of endothelial cell proliferation”) and immune processes (“myeloid leukocyte cytokine production”). Downregulated genes were enriched (p<X?) for terms involved in protein translation (“mitochondrial translation”) and transcriptional regulation (“RNA processing”). Cells treated with media from BeWo cells treated with Relative to the conditioned media treatment, MEHP treatment differentially expressedupregulated (FDR<0.05) eight genes (FDR<0.05), including genes involved in fat/lipid metabolism (PLIN2, fold-change: 1.4; CPT1A, fold-change: 1.4) and iron uptake (TFRC, fold-change: 1.3), relative to the BeWo conditioned media treatment.

Conclusion: Our results show that hHematopoietic stem cells are responsive to media that has been conditioned by placental cells, potentially impacting processes related to stem cell maintenance and proliferation, which may represent placental-immune communication important for development. Additionally tThe metabolite MEHP only had a modest impact on these responses at the single concentration tested. Future directions will investigate components of placental cell media (hormones, microvesicles, and proteins) contributing to hematopoietic cell signals. 
